# A Brief Reflection
As we begin on our journey to discover Computer Science, we can look back into the history of mankind, and learn about this fascinating study.

The Study of Computer Science isn't as direct as you may think it is, and it's history dates back much longer than our modern electronic devices truly exist.

As humans moved on from being pure hunter-gatherers, and into civilization, we found that we needed to keep track of and process a variety of information.

Like in years past, we have found different ways of storing, reading, processing, and transporting information, with each slow improvement allowing things to get faster and faster.

Originally, this happened as people told stories by word from genration to generation, with later developments, such as writing being necessary.

When we started to farm the land, and governments and economies took place, we started to keep track of certain aspects of our daily lives.

For example, in the [Ancient Mesopotaminan city of Uruk, they used clay tablets to track how much bread was made](https://www.bbc.com/news/business-39870485).

As the need arose, we developed other ways of counting, such as the [Abacus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abacus), in which we used beads on a wooden rod to count and keep track of data.

Later, in Ancient Greece, we had great philosophers, who changed the way that we think, in many ways. Their thoughts affect almost all academic studies in almost every field to this day.

One of these early thoughts and discussions was by the Student of Plato, Aristotle. Aristotle rationalized that we can use logic and reason to find an answer to our problems, and to this day, we can still do so.

The Study of Discrete Mathematics, is in its true form, a study of Logic. We use evidence, and truths, to derive what else is in the world around us.

Using this evidence, we can find out how our amazing world of computing has come to be.

- ### [Back to Chapters](%WEBPATH%/courses/discretemath/chapters/)