# Chapter 03 - Propositional Logic

Last time, we talked about propositions, and how certain statements can be either true or false. We can use propositional logic, to combine these statements into new, bigger statements.

These combined statements are called **compound propositions**.

We use special mathematical symbols to define these.

These symbols represent what we call **Logical Operators**.

They function similarly to say addition when you are doing algebra, but instead, they function on propositions.

The following table will discuss each one.

This table comes from [Geeksforgeeks's page on Propositional Logic](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/engineering-mathematics/proposition-logic/)

| Connective Symbols | Words | Temrs | Example |
| - | - | - | - |
| $\land$ | AND | Conjunction | $p \land q$ |
| $\lor$ | OR |Disjunction | $p \lor q$ |
| $\implies$ | Implies | Implication | $p \implies q$ |
| $\iff$ | If and only If | Biconditional | $p \iff q$ |
| $\neg$ | Not | Negation| $\neg p $ |

## Truth Tables
Each of these symbols has a different output based on its diferent inputs.

We can make a special table that shows the output of all possible scenarios. This is called a Truth Table.

In the future, we will come up with different ways to solve logic-based problems with something similar to propositions, so make sure to pay attention.

On the left side of a truth table is every possible input, with all possibilities, with the right side being the output(s) of a function.

We can take each of these possibilities and work them out.

## Conjunction
Conjunction, also known as a logical AND takes two propositions. The conjunction $p \land q$, which means P AND Q is true when both $p$ is true and $q$ is true. Otherwise, it is false.

The truth table of $p \land q$ is

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \land q$ |
| - | - | - |
|T|T|T|
|T|F|F|
|F|T|F|
|F|F|F|

For example, Let's say that $p$ is It is raining today and $q$ is I am outside, then the conjunction is true when I am outside in the rain.

## Disjunction
Disjunction, also known as a Logical OR, also takes two propositions. It is the logical inversion of Conjunction.

The disjunction $p \lor q$, meaning p OR q is true when $p$ is true, or $q$ is true.

This is the truth table for $p \lor q$

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \lor q$ |
| - | - | - |
|T|T|T|
|T|F|T|
|F|T|T|
|F|F|F|

Using our previous example, our disjunction is true any time that I am outside, or it is raining.

## Negation
Negation is the opposite of a preposition.

If $p$ is the preposition, then its negation is denoted by $\neg p$. In english it means, "not p".

Its truth table goes like this:

| $p$ | $\neg p$|
| - | - |
|T | F |
|F | T |

An example would be if $p = $ I am outside. $\neg p$ would be I am not outside. 

## Exclusive Or
An exclusive or, is a specific case in our logic. For two propositions $p$ or $q$, we can write $p \oplus q$

It essentialy means, either $p$ or $q$, but not both.

If one of $p$ or $q$ is true, than the output is true, but not true when both are the same.

It's truth table goes like this:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \oplus q$ |
| - | - | - |
|T|T|F|
|T|F|T|
|F|T|T|
|F|F|F|

## Implication
When we are programming, we sometimes use something called an if statement.

For example, in C, we may write

```c
// if this is the case
if (x) {
    // do this.
    x++;
}
```

We have a similar case in our logic.

If we have two propositions $p$ and $q$, we can ask "if $p$ then $q$".

In our logical terms, we write it like this: $p \implies q$

In this case, P is called the hypothesis, and q isthe conclusion or consequence.

It can also be called a conditional statement.

This implication is false when p is true, and q is false. Otherwise, our output is true.

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \implies q$ |
| - | - | - |
|T|T|T|
|T|F|F|
|F|T|T|
|F|F|T|

## Bicondtional

Using our two propistions $p$ and $q$, the statement "$p$ if and only if $q$" is a biconditional, and is written as $p \iff q$.

It has the same truth value as $(p \implies q) \land (q \implies p)$.

It is true when p and q have the same truth values, and is false otherwise.

The truth table goes as follows:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \iff q$ |
| - | - | - |
|T|T|T|
|T|F|F|
|F|T|F|
|F|F|T|

- ### [Back to Chapters](%WEBPATH%/courses/discretemath/chapters/)