# Chapter 4 - Enter Boolean Algebra

Last time, we discussed propositional logic, and how different operators can affect different statements.

Propositional logic has a lot in common with a branch of math called Boolean Alegbra,

Like the previous work of logic, we are working with propositions, meaning that all variables must be True, or false.

Boolean Algebra breaks these systems down into just three parts:

our AND ($\land$), OR ($\lor$), and NOT ($\neg$) gates.

Our varaibles are always True or False, though are sometimes encoded as a 0 (False) or 1 (True).

Our operators function the same as before, but using Boolean algebra and logic, we can derive every other form of logic that we had previously.

# Laws
In regular algebra, we learned of a few laws involving variables.

These are also the case for Boolean Algebra, though a few extra laws take place.

## Associativity

### OR
$x \lor (y \lor z) = (x \lor y) \lor z$

### AND
$x \land (y \land z) = (x \land y) \land z$

## Commutativity

### OR
$x \lor y = y \lor x$

### AND
$x \land y = y \land x$

## Distributivity of $\land$ over $\lor$

$x \land (y \lor z) = (x \land y) \lor (y \land z)$

## Identity
### OR
$x \lor 0 = x$

### AND
$x \lor 1 = x$

## Annihlator

### AND
$x \land 0 = 0$

### OR
$x \lor 1 = 1$

## Idempotence

### OR
$x \lor x = x$

### AND
$x \land x = x$

## Absorption

### Case 1
$x \land (x \lor y) = x$

### Case 2
$x \lor (x \land y) = x$

## Distributivity of $\lor$ over $\land$
$x \lor (y \land z) = (x \lor y) \land (x \lor z)$

# De Morgan's Law
This is a law that doesn't just apply to boolean algebra, but also to Set theory, but we will explain it in these terms.

$\neg(a \land b) = \neg a \lor \neg b$

It also works on the contrary

$\neg(a \lor b) = \neg a \land \neg b$

This law means that we can use our logic gates using only AND gates or only OR gates combined with NOT gates to create the other.

These laws, in the long term will prove useful to allow us to create much more.

- ### [Back to Chapters](%WEBPATH%/courses/discretemath/chapters/)