# Chapter 5 - Simplifying...

In the last chapter, we discussed boolean algebra.

I breifly mentioned that we can create any logic circuit using only AND, OR, and NOT gates.

Let's make an application of that.

The following truth table discusses a function (unknown combination of logic) that we need to find.

| $x$ | $y$ | F($x$, $y$)|
|-|-|-|
|T|T|F|
|T|F|T|
|F|T|T|
|F|F|F|

It may look familiar, as it is actually an XOR ($\oplus$) gate.

For this chapter, we will come up with a couple of solutions to find a combination of AND, OR, and NOT gates that will give us this final output.

# Minterms and Maxterms

Minterms and Maxterms are a series of groupings in a logic circuit that when combined, produces a specific output.

## Minterm
A Minterm is the product of various literals, in which each literal occurs once.

It is also called a Sum of Products representation

Looking at a table of variables, we can make a minterm from it.

|A | B | minterm |
|-|-|-|
|T|T|AB|
|T|F|AB'|
|F|T|A'B|
|F|F|A'B'|

With our example truth table

| $x$ | $y$ | F($x$, $y$)|
|-|-|-|
|T|T|F|
|T|F|T|
|F|T|T|
|F|F|F|

We will take each case that the output is true, and use that to make our minterm.

xy' + x'y

This notation is a common form for boolean algebra.

We can directly replace it with our previous form too.

In any case that we are adding, we will use an OR ($\lor$). Any multiplications, are an AND ($\land$), and and asterick, or prime is a NOT ($\neg$)

So our function is equal to $(x \land \neg y) \lor (\neg x \land y)$.

## Maxterm

Like our minterm, we do something similar, but our cases are the opposite. This is considered the product of sum.

In this new case, we use an asterick for each case of a 1, and add our variables together.

|A | B | maxterm |
|-|-|-|
|T|T|A'+B'|
|T|F|A'+B|
|F|T|A+B'|
|F|F|A+B|

With our example truth table:

| $x$ | $y$ | F($x$, $y$)|
|-|-|-|
|T|T|F|
|T|F|T|
|F|T|T|
|F|F|F|

We will take each case where the output is false, and write out maxterms.

(x+y)(x'+y')

This is our function.

We can try to simplify with algebra. This functions like regular algebra.

xx' + xy' + yx' + yy'

Using our laws, the cases in which we have xx' or yy', we can assume that those will be a 0, as one of the cases will be a zero.


0 + xy' + yx' + 0

Anything ORed with a zero is itself, so we are left with
xy' + yx'

Using our laws, we can see that our maxterm can be simplified to
xy' + x'y.

This is the same as our minterm, which shows that this is correct and verifies our math.

This means that

$x \oplus y = xy' + x'y$.


### Tips and Tricks
We've taken these terms, and using some algebra have simplified it down to its bare components.

Generally the case with the least number of outputs is going to be the easier approach to finding the most efficient solution to a problem.

In the case of our function, we had an equal number of false outputs as true outputs, so either would work.

Use your own judgement, and come up with a solution that works.

Generally that means that we will find what is best.

# Another example, with an extra few steps

Now that we know how minterms and maxterms work, let's look at another function.

|x|y|z|f(x,y,z)|
|-|-|-|-|
|T|T|T|T|
|T|T|F|T|
|T|F|T|T|
|T|F|F|F|
|F|T|T|T|
|F|T|F|F|
|F|F|T|F|
|F|F|F|F|

This function has three inputs, x, y, and z.

We also have an equal number of outputs, so let's pick a side to foucs on. We'll use a minterm.

xyz + xyz' + xy'z + x'yz

This is our base minterm that we will use.

It's a lot of variables, so we may want to consider seeing if we can simplify it at all.

We could try to use some boolean algebra, like we did with the maxterm example, but there's a far easier solution.

It is called a Karnaugh Map or K-map.

Let's make a basic table that we will fill out with our cases.

| | b'c' | b'c | bc | bc' |
|-|-|-|-|-|
| a'| | | | |
| a | | | | |

For each of our minterms, we will write a 1 in the boxes that match.

So for xyz + xyz' + xy'z + x'yz we will have

| | y'z' | y'z | yz | yz' |
|-|-|-|-|-|
| x'| | |1| |
| x | |1|1|1|

If I were able to draw, I would circle any set of two numbers that touched. There would be three circles that I will draw. I'll highlight the next three tables of the items I would circle.


| | y'z' | y'z | yz | yz' |
|-|-|-|-|-|
| x'| | |1| |
| x | |**1**|**1**|1|


| | y'z' | y'z | yz | yz' |
|-|-|-|-|-|
| x'| | |**1**| |
| x | |1|**1**|1|


| | y'z' | y'z | yz | yz' |
|-|-|-|-|-|
| x'| | |1| |
| x | |1|**1**|**1**|

In each of these cases, we have highlighted a variable that is doubled, and can be removed.

This should leave our output as:

xz + yz + xy

This function is something that we will use later on our Low To High Level journey, but that will be a while away.

With that, we have shown that we can use the laws that were given to us, and can combine our cases of AND, OR, and NOT gates, into greater logic gates, that we can eventually combine into a powerful logic circuit.

- ### [Back to Chapters](%WEBPATH%/courses/discretemath/chapters/)