# Reorganizing Content for the future
written by [Cory Borek](https://github.com/CoryBorek/) on September 8, 2025.

## A Brief Recap
Hey! I don't often have a huge amount of time on my plate to contribute to this project, which is unfortunate. I have, however, made a few beneficial changes.

I updated the Markdown site that I use to support a sidebar, which can allow us to find pages quicker. This will reformat things a bit, which is fine.

I use the same code for both this website and my personal notes site, so that makes it a little simpler.

I am a full time college student, so that plus my main YouTube channel makes my time a little limited.

A while ago, I planned out the content for Episode 8 of LTHL. I plan on focusing on how we can write a very basic program in machine code.

The gist of it is already on this website, so if you want a sneak peek, feel free to look there.

I also updated a few of the older videos from almost a year ago to use our current logo, and changes the titles a little bit. This may help with views in the future.

## Plans

I would like to find some time to record the next episode on Machine Code. I plan on doing it on pen+paper, which is different from my typical content style.

A bit of inspiration for this is Ben Eater.

He has a lot of cool content, especially his 6502 homebrew computer. I would look at [Ben Eater's video on Converting to Binary](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v3-a-zqKfgA) as a reference. It has a cool explanation on Long Division that may be useful.

Anyways, that's enough blabbering, and I need to head to a lecture.

Cory M. Borek
